 For example, in one study , a small microphone enclosure was used to localize one source with the help of a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) trained on a variety of sounds including speech. In our previous work , we used an omnidirectional sensor surrounded by cubes of different sizes and a dictionary of spectral prototypes to localize speech sources. Second, if ---that is, the exact source waveform---are assumed to be known as in , there are no modeling errors or challenges associated with the phase information. We, however, assume much less, namely only that the source is speech. In the following, we first lay down an intuitive argument for how monaural cues help as well as a simple algorithm for localizing white sources. In Section , we describe our devices and results for localizing white noise and speech. In other words,  belongs to a cone defined as 

Each configuration of sources  results in a different cone . Second, for simplicity, we replace each cone  by its smallest enclosing subspace  represented by a matrix
  _ |^2, |^2 . In the following, we generalize the source model to more interesting signals such as speech. Then the magnitude spectrogram of the observation  can be expressed as

for , , , and . In other words, we are only concerned with identifying the support of . Second, each source has a sparse representation in the dictionary . In the following we derive the MU rules for our objective . On the one hand, a course discretization limits the localization accuracy to approximately the size of the discretization bin . On the other hand a fine discretization may warrant a smaller error floor, but it implies a model matrix with a higher coherence only worsening the ill-posedness of the optimization problem . For speech localization, we test two source dictionaries. For 36 bins, there is an inherent average error of . In our case, this matrix is  which is given as input to the algorithm. In the one source case, all devices perform well. For two sources, the accuracy of the LEGO devices is still high, though lower than for one source. As expected the overall localization performance by the less smooth LEGO scatterers is significantly better than by KEMAR. As expected, the localization accuracy for male speakers is lower than for female speakers. On the horizontal axis, we have the estimated direction which is one of 36 only. For two sources, the number of outliers increases for both types as seen in Figure (b). For two-source localization, however, a good source model like prototypes is required. On the other hand, more complex and interesting scattering patterns are needed to localize multiple sources. In order to localize general, non-white sources, one further requires a good source model. For example, in Eq.